Hi, everybody.
Welcome to session 349,
Creating Rich User Interfaces
for Web Content in Safari.
I'm Beth Dakin.
I'm an engineer on the
Safari and WebKit team,
and I would like to apologize
in advance for my amplified
sniffles and potential sneezes.
Before we begin,
I would like to get to know
you all a little bit better.
So I'd like a show of hands for
everyone in the room who considers
themselves to be a professional
or really advanced web developer.
Okay, we have a lot of you.
You know more than I do.
But I'm going to tell
you about new things.
How about novice web
developers or just for fun,
people who play around
with web development?
Okay, a few of you too.
How many of you attended the
WebKit overview session this morning?
Fair number.
How many of you have designed a web page,
a widget or another piece of
web content specifically with
Safari or WebKit in mind?
A lot of you, okay.
And finally, how many of you have
downloaded a web kit nightly?
Nice, excellent.
I think this presentation will
really address all of those groups.
For the more advanced web developers,
I'll be telling you about
new features that you can
add to your arsenal of tools.
And for the more novice developers,
none of this stuff is really
that difficult to understand.
In fact, that's the beauty of
some of these features,
that they achieve great effects in your
web content with very simple syntax.
So all of the features that
I'm going to tell you about
today are really about adding
sophistication to your user interface.
A lot of these things are whizzy
effects that were previously
impossible in web content,
or only possible with a lot of
really complicated JavaScript,
making these effects more
prohibitive for more novice users.
But now these things are
really elegant and simple in
standards-friendly HTML and CSS.
So specifically,
we'll start by talking about a really
exciting new feature in WebKit,
CSS transforms.
This is a feature that was
pioneered here at Apple,
and it's undergoing the
standardization process now.
It allows you to apply any affine
transform to any element in your page,
and it's really cool.
Then I'll be telling
you about transitions.
Transitions are a really simple
form of animation that you
can do strictly through CSS.
The syntax is incredibly simple,
and it just allows you to animate
from one state to another instead of
quickly jerking to that new state.
And like transforms,
transitions were pioneered here
at Apple and are now undergoing
the standardization process.
Then we'll talk about fonts and text.
Even something as simple as the
text on your page can really
become a lot more sophisticated
with some of our new features.
Specifically,
I'll be telling you about web fonts,
which are a part of CSS3,
and a few new styling techniques.
And finally,
we'll talk about web accessibility.
I found that a lot of
developers in general,
not just web developers,
aren't super familiar with
the idea of accessibility.
But basically,
the idea of web accessibility is that
the content that you create should
be accessible and usable to everyone,
regardless of any potential disabilities.
So in some cases,
that means making your website and web
content more keyboard accessible for
users that may have mobility impairments.
And in some cases,
that means making your web content work
better with a program like a screen
reader that attempts to read the web
content to a user that has trouble
seeing it or can't see it at all.
So everyone in this room,
I feel confident,
is familiar with Safari.
It's the built-in browser on Mac OS X.
And I know that a lot of you seem
to have downloaded WebKit Nightly's,
and a lot of you were even at the session
this morning about the WebKit overview.
But I'm going to give you
a very brief overview now,
just because I found that a lot
of people who have downloaded
WebKit Nightly's still struggle with
the concept of exactly what WebKit is.
WebKit is the engine that
sits underneath Safari.
It's a framework that takes
care of dealing with all of the
web content that you create.
So this is what takes
care of downloading,
loading, parsing,
interpreting and displaying
all of your HTML,
CSS and JavaScript and making
sure it's correctly interactable
and all of that good stuff.
So WebKit is the part of Safari that
deals with what you create.
One of the many awesome things
about Safari is that it is currently
available on three platforms,
Windows, Mac OS X, and iPhone,
and WebKit is the same everywhere.
Of course,
there are minor platform differences
to account for things like a touch
being different from a click,
and all of these applications sometimes
have different release cycles,
so the exact version of WebKit they
release is sometimes slightly different,
but there are documentations
for the fine details.
The main point is that you can remain
confident that if you spend time making
your site work in one version of Safari,
it will most likely,
almost certainly work in all of them
because WebKit is the same everywhere.
And finally, WebKit is open source,
completely open source.
The code is available,
but we have a large community around
the open source project as well.
WebKit.org is really the portal
for our open source project.
You can get to anything
that's open source from there.
We have a really active community.
And also, if you are really interested
in the features that I'm
telling you about today,
well, if you follow our blog,
then you would have known about
all of these features for a few
months or even a year now anyway,
because we always post on our blog when
we have cool new features in the engine.
So it's a really great place
to keep in touch with us.
So first I'm going to talk
to you about CSS transforms.
As I mentioned earlier,
this is a feature that allows you,
via simple CSS syntax,
to specify any affine transform
on any element in your page.
So just to go back to high school math,
affine transforms are translate, scale,
skew and rotate,
all in a two-dimensional space.
These are actually this feature,
all of these things are already
in a version of Shipping Safari.
They're already in Safari 3.1,
which is what mostly
everybody is using anyway,
which is really cool.
My friend recently went to Hawaii and
she took all these pictures and asked
me to help her put together a website
for her to show all of her friends and
family all the pictures that she took.
So I whipped this really
incredibly simple website up that
doesn't have much jazz to it.
I wanted it to look more
like real-life photos,
so I gave the photos
some really simple CSS,
just some padding and a black
border to get that sort of white
border with a black edge thing.
To make it look more like a
photo in real life if you had
it printed out at the drugstore.
But this layout doesn't look
anything like real life,
right?
It's just like a jumble of photos.
And I achieved it just with
one line of CSS float left,
which just had all of the
photos lined up like this.
But again, this talk is about adding
sophistication to your user interface.
So we're going to make this a lot more
sophisticated with CSS transforms.
And my goal here with the particular
sophistication that I wanted to
achieve was to create something
that looked like real life.
I like the way I have the
white and black border here.
So.
First,
we're going to start with translate.
Translate is a really
simple transformation.
It simply shifts an object.
You can shift in just the horizontal
space with translate X or just
vertically with translate Y or in both
dimensions at once with translate.
The CSS property accepts a length
or a percentage where the percentage
represents that percentage of
the border box of the element.
This is the CSS.
Again, you can see the CSS I added to
the image already that I mentioned
with the border to give it the
white border with the black edge.
And then I just applied this dash
webkit transform translate X.
Don't let the dash
webkit prefix scare you.
Some of you may have seen this before.
But this is just something
that we always do,
all browsers do,
with experimental features.
This is just to symbolize that this is
still a draft version of this feature.
It hasn't been finalized in
any official specification.
Or the official specification
has not been finalized.
So Firefox does the same thing
with the dash mods prefix.
Okay, back to the code.
We just are going to translate
by 20 pixels just in the
X horizontal dimension.
So that's going to take this photo and
just move it slightly to the right.
So if we look back at that CSS,
what I'm going to do is I'm going
to use JavaScript to apply this
incrementally to my series of photos
so that each photo is moved 20 pixels
farther to the right than the last.
And without CSS, I can achieve this look,
which already is a big improvement,
I think, over what I had before.
And it looks more like a bunch of
photos sort of spread across on a table.
So scale is what I'd
like to talk about next.
Also very easy to understand,
just changes the size of an object
by whatever scale factor you specify.
You can stretch an object
horizontally with scale X,
stretch vertically with scale Y,
or stretch evenly in both
dimensions with just scale.
A negative input will flip an object
and a fractional input will shrink it.
So here I'm going to use my
WebKit transform to scale
with a scale factor of 0.15.
So that's going to create this tiny,
tiny, tiny photo.
So it's going to look like this.
I added in a translation here, though,
and I'm going to do my same trick
where I apply this translation and
scale factor incrementally with
JavaScript so that each photo will be
20 pixels farther to the right than
the last one and slightly larger.
So that's going to take the
user interface that I created
before and create this sort of
three-dimensional effect using scale.
So now instead of looking like I have a
bunch of photos spread out on the table,
it's sort of like they're
standing up and sort of going
backwards from where I'm sitting.
Rotate.
Also very simple,
it just rotates an object
by a specified angle.
The CSS property accepts the
CSS angle in degrees or radian units.
So here I am applying a
negative 30 degree rotation,
which is going to rotate my
image 30 degrees counterclockwise
since it's a negative angle.
And that's just going to
give me this jaunty photo.
And I'm going to do the same thing
again where I apply this transform
incrementally using JavaScript and
changing the angle slightly every time.
And I can get this really cool
pile effect of all of my photos.
Finally, SKU.
SKU, I think,
is a little -- it's a little weirder.
It's a little harder to
wrap your brain around,
I think.
It just shifts an object
at a specified angle.
So this first pink box is SKU'd
in both the horizontal and
vertical dimensions equally.
And the second one is
SKU'd just with SKU X,
just horizontally, and the last one is
SKU'd with just SKU Y.
So if I just apply a simple
negative 15 degree skew to my image,
I'm going to get this little
parallelogram sort of looking image.
So when I first was
messing around with this,
I saw this first test that I ran,
and I kind of struggled thinking like,
oh, how can I turn this into some kind of
real-world looking photo user interface?
Like,
I don't think skew's right for this.
But I started chaining
together these transforms,
just messing around with them,
and I really quickly came up
with something that I actually
thought was pretty cool.
So I'm going to show you what I did.
First, I added a negative 15 degree
rotation along with the skew,
so that sort of tilts it up a little.
And I started to think that maybe I could
line up the photos in a row like this.
So I added in a translation
and a second photo,
and I think it sort of gets
a three-dimensional effect,
kind of like you got with scale.
And I think it's easier to see
when you add in even more photos.
They sort of look like they're lined up
like Rockettes about to do a kick line.
But I really think, you know,
the three-dimensional thing here
is still a little bit of a stretch,
more so than the scale version.
So I added a box shadow.
This is another really cool feature
in Safari that adds a shadow
to any element in your page.
Really simple syntax.
I just specified a color for the shadow.
Here I'm using black with some opacity.
And then a left and right
offset and a blur radius.
So that's going to take these photos from
looking like this to looking like this.
And here I really think
we've achieved another,
you know, three-dimensional.
Real-world looking user interface with,
like, one line of CSS.
So one of the really awesome things
about transforms is that they are
so easy to use that people are sort
of playing around with them already,
even though our implementation is
just at the beginning and it's just
undergoing the standardization process.
This is a cool example, I think.
The developer over at cupodev.co.uk
made this little analog clock using
CSS transforms and JavaScript animations.
I emailed him recently asking
if I could use a screenshot of
his site in my presentation.
And he explained to me that he
decided to make this clock after
he learned about transforms because
there's an almost identical clock on
the front page of the BBC website.
And it's developed with Flash.
And he just thought that it
seemed like such a simple thing.
You should be able to
do it with simple HTML,
CSS and JavaScript.
It should be something
that's straightforward.
And so he made his own version.
the code is much simpler
and it's really cool.
Okay, CSS transitions.
CSS transitions let you
animate a change in state.
So, let's say you wanted this ball
on the other side of the slide.
Instead of just jumping there,
we can easily make it look like
it rolled across the slide.
So in the context of this photo
page we've been building up,
one of the limitations of all of
these different user interfaces that
we've created with CSS transforms,
compared with the original
one that I showed you,
is that we need to add a way to
navigate through these photos,
right?
Right now we can only
see one photo at a time,
and in my original sort of sloppy-looking
implementation where I just
floated all the photos to the left,
we could see them all at once at least
and just scroll through the document.
So the most straightforward thing to do,
I think,
would be to add an on-click handler and
have the user click through the photos.
So a common thing to do in a situation
like this would be to have the on-click
handler change certain CSS properties.
So I might want it to set the
display property of the image
that you clicked on to none.
So you would get this really quick jerky
movement if you did something like that,
like from here to here, and that's it.
So something else I could
do is... I don't want the
image to disappear entirely.
Maybe I want it to stay
on screen somewhere.
Maybe I want it to get a little bit
smaller using a fractional scale
factor and maybe jump to the upper
right-hand corner of the screen.
So that would give us another sort of
jerky movement like that really quick.
So this is exactly what CSS transitions
let you do more elegantly
in a more sophisticated way.
You can animate from an old
state to a new state over time.
If you're familiar with animations
from the graphics world,
you can think of transitions as an
animation with exactly two keyframes,
where the two keyframes are the
beginning state and the ending state,
and WebKit takes care of everything in
between in terms of the actual animation.
So let me show you just how
easy this is to specify.
First, you want to specify a
transition property.
This is a property in CSS that you
want to animate whenever it changes.
So for instance,
there are all kinds of things
that you could animate.
To give you just a few examples,
you could animate border size, rotation,
rotation, or opacity.
So if I want to specify
an opacity transition,
I would just on my image tag declare
WebKitTransitionPropertyOpacity.
So this is saying any time the
value of the opacity property
changes for any of my images,
since I've specified this
with the image tag selector,
whenever that changes,
I want it to animate instead of just
immediately changing to the new state.
Then you want to specify a duration.
This will default to zero,
so change it or it will be just the same
as not defining a transition at all.
So here I've changed it to three seconds.
I want a nice long transition.
And finally, if you want,
you can specify a
transition timing function.
This will default to ease,
so you don't need to
specify anything here.
And there are a lot of other
built-in functions like ease in,
ease out, ease in-out, linear,
that will give you a slightly
different look in terms of exactly
how the animation proceeds.
And if you really want to,
you can even provide your
own cubic bezier as a path
for your animation to follow.
So here's an example where I'm
simply changing the default timing
function from ease to ease in.
So transitions are really
best understood seen,
so I would like to invite Vicki Murley,
our evangelist extraordinaire,
on stage to show you some transitions.
Thanks, Beth.
So Beth has given you a great
overview of what's possible with
CSS transforms and transitions.
So now let's look at a concrete example.
So if we load up this first example here,
and we take a look at the code that
we used to implement this example,
It's really pretty straightforward.
As you can see,
there's not a whole lot here.
I've got a couple
CSS declarations for the body,
the heading on the page,
and the images on this page.
I've got some HTML markup at the bottom
that shows the body and my heading.
And in the middle here,
I just have one JavaScript function
to stack up these photos.
And as Beth said,
all that we're doing here is
we have an array of our photos,
and as we go through that array,
we create an image element
for each item in the array.
We have a string that we're
using for our transform.
We're setting the attributes on our
photo as we go through the array.
and eventually we append
that photo to the document.
And then we're starting at a
rotation of negative 30 degrees,
so maybe about 10 o'clock,
and we're incrementing by 5
degrees as we lay out these photos.
And when we arrive at 30 degrees,
we reset so that we don't end up
with any photos that are upside down.
So in practice,
if we inspect this element,
Oh, it's not enabled.
We're not going to do that.
You would see that each of these,
we have a bunch of image tags in this
document that have the appropriate
CSS settings that I just went over.
So, right now, there are no effects
associated with this document.
And if we wanted to,
since this looks like a
real-world stack of photos,
one effect that we might want to add to
iterate through these photos is sort of,
if I wanted to pick up these
photos and kind of toss one over
to the upper right-hand corner.
So, that's the functionality that I'm
going to add during this demo.
So, again, taking a look at this code.
There are three very simple steps
that I am going to do to add this
effect of picking up the photo
and tossing it off to the corner.
The first thing I'm going to do is add
a few CSS properties to this image tag.
As you can see,
I've added the WebKit transition
property property.
And here I'm specifying which
properties I would like to animate.
In this case,
WebKit transform top and right.
I've also specified the duration,
which should be one second.
I could have specified
different durations for all
three of these properties,
like one second for the transform,
three seconds for top,
and four seconds for right.
But that doesn't really make
sense because I want to make
just one cohesive animation up
to that upper right-hand corner.
So I want them all to be one second.
The next thing I'm going to do is
add a function here at the bottom.
Many of you are probably familiar
with animating CSS properties,
so this will probably look very familiar.
Here, I'm just saying,
when I call this function twirlAway,
I want to set my transform
to rotate 360 degrees,
I want to scale down a little bit,
and I want to set the top
and right attributes to 5,
so that that photo ends up 5
pixels from the top and 5 pixels
from the right of the screen.
The last thing I have to
do is add my event handler.
Before I append this
element to the document,
and all I'm doing is saying,
when I click on this photo,
call my function down below twirl away.
So I'm going to save.
This is a photo of this in Safari.
And now you'll see that when
I click on these images,
they have a great rotation
up to the right-hand corner.
I also wanted to show you,
I'm going to change this duration
to be a little bit longer,
to show you that
I can also do multiple
animations at once.
I don't have to wait for one animation
to finish for the next one to begin.
So that's our first example
with our stack of photos.
Let's look at one more example with
this example that Beth went through
with our photos that are sort of
stacked on their side and in a row here.
So again,
if I wanted to look through these photos,
maybe I want to lift one out of
the stack and have it scale up
a little bit and face the user.
So again, looking at this code--
I'm going to make just three changes,
just like I did last time.
The first thing I'm going to
do is add my CSS properties.
This time I'm specifying for
a WebKit transition property.
I'm just saying all.
So any properties that can
be animated will be animated
if you use this shortcut,
all.
My transition duration
is half a second here,
partial seconds work.
And I set my WebKit transition
timing function to ease in/out,
different from the default.
Next, just like last time, step two,
I'm adding some functions
here to say pull from stack,
sets my transform,
basically turning it towards me,
the rotation is zero degrees,
the skew is zero degrees,
and I'm scaling it up a little bit.
Next, just like last time, step two,
I'm adding some functions
here to say pull from stack,
sets my transform,
basically turning it towards me,
the rotation is zero degrees,
the skew is zero degrees,
and I'm scaling it up a little bit.
Lastly,
step three is adding the event listeners.
Took up this functionality.
MouseOver is going to pull
the photo out of the stack,
and MouseOut will return it to the stack.
So saving, and--
Do not reload.
Reloading.
So now when I mouse over these photos,
you can see that they're really quickly
just moved right out of this stack here.
And also, as you can see,
I can interrupt these animations
like right in the middle.
I don't have to wait for one to complete
before I sort of start the next one.
So maybe I can't decide which one
of these photos I want to look at.
Oh, I've chosen that one.
So that gives you a great overview
of what's possible with just a few
lines of code with CSS transitions,
and I'm looking forward to seeing
some great web pages and web
applications that use this technology.
Thank you.
Thanks, Vicki.
That was awesome.
Can we go back to slides, please?
So if you think that's cool,
there's even more animation available
in the new iPhone version of WebKit.
And if you want to learn more about that,
you should attend a session tomorrow
all about transforms and animation.
It's a great talk.
It's tomorrow at 3:30 in Presidio,
I believe.
And it's super cool.
[Transcript missing]
Images are time-consuming
from your perspective.
If you're more of a novice and you
aren't really familiar with Photoshop,
there's sort of a large amount of time
that you need to put into just learning
how to use image editing software.
It can be difficult to use.
And even if you are an expert at it,
it's still more difficult to
create an image in image editing
software than it is just to
type in the text that you want.
If you have a lot of photos
representing text on your page,
unless somebody's printing out your site
using a really high-quality printer,
it's going to become difficult to read.
The text will be imprecise.
Localization becomes an issue.
If you want to make your web page
available in many different languages,
then in addition to translating
all the actual text on your page,
you need to generate new images
for all of these languages
that you want to support.
Finally, accessibility is an issue.
Sure, if you use an image tag,
the actual image element,
then you can use an alt attribute,
which is okay.
If your alt attribute reflects the
text that's written in the photo,
that will work okay.
But what's really a problem is when
you're using images as background images.
And actually,
the examples that I showed you at
the Zen Garden are doing just that.
They plugged into the content by using
those images as background images.
And a screen reader has no way to know.
That a background image has
text in it that's worth reading.
So that's text that's going
to be completely skipped over.
There are all of these hacks out
there to work around this problem,
but really that's what they are.
They're hacks.
So it would be really better
if you didn't have to always
resort to that as a technique.
So here we come to CSS3 web fonts.
This is actually a feature,
the idea of this feature has been
around for a really long time,
and only recently was the logjam
broken in terms of coming up
with an implementation of it
that everyone could agree upon.
This is a part of CSS3.
It's already available in Safari 3.1.
This lets you link to and retrieve
actual font files within a style sheet.
So one thing that you need to be careful
of when you use this feature is that you
need to make sure that you're using it
with fonts that you're allowed to use.
All fonts come with
licenses attached to them,
their intellectual property.
You can't pick up any old font
and use it in your web content
now that web fonts is implemented.
But that being said,
there are a lot of fonts available
out there that are free and
available for use in this way.
I grabbed a number of them from
myfonts.com when I was messing
around with this feature.
So I'm going to show you how to use it.
The font that I picked,
I wanted to add this to my photo
page because that text is really
dragging us down now that we have
this really cool layout and this
really cool way to interact with it.
We just have this Times New Roman text
that says "Life in Maui."
So I wanted to make that better.
So I grabbed this font called
"Glasscrack" off of myfonts.com.
It was designed by Ray Larrabee.
He has a lot of other great
and free fonts available,
some that aren't free too,
but they're all beautiful.
So the font's actually called
"Glasscrack." So I specified this
font family name "Glasscrack."
I could have called it anything,
but I decided just to keep
the actual name of the font.
It's in my @fontface declaration.
And then I provide a source URL for
where I've hosted it on a local server,
and I specify what format it's in here.
It's in TrueType format.
And then I can use it in my CSS anywhere,
the same way I would use any other
font family name like Helvetica,
which is listed as the fallback
for this particular font.
So that's going to take my page from
this plain old Times New Roman Life in
Maui text to this much cooler text
that really fits in a lot better
with the theme that I have here.
So I mentioned that I wanted
to talk about a few other
text styling techniques,
and these are all new and cool things
that make the idea of using text much
more appealing because you have so much
flexibility with altering it in CSS.
So text stroke is what I would
like to talk about first.
This is a really simple CSS property
that lets you specify a color and
width for the outline of a glyph,
which is the stroke.
So here I've changed this
Times New Roman A glyph
to have a pink stroke.
You could also change
the width of that stroke.
It would not affect the
metrics of the font,
just the thickness of the outline.
Finally, you can specify fill color.
Here I've changed it to blue.
If you don't specify fill color,
then the fill will default to
whatever the color property is set to,
which will default to black if
you don't set it to anything else.
So here I'm going to add some text
stroke to my Life in Maui text.
I'm going to make the stroke,
the outline,
be one pixel and dark slate blue,
and I'm going to fill
it with yellow-green.
So that'll take us from here.
and Sarah Kuhn,
and I'm going to show you how to
add depth to your web application.
Thank you.
Next,
I'm going to add a little text shadow
just to give it a little more oomph.
This feature has been
around in Safari for ages.
This originally shipped, I think,
with Safari 2.0, but it's still awesome.
And it's a lot like box shadow,
which I showed you earlier.
I just specify a color for the shadow,
left and right offset and a blur radius.
So that's just going to add a little
extra dimension from here to here.
So this effect is a little subtle.
I'll show it to you again.
It goes from here to here.
So one of the really awesome
things about this feature is that
once I started looking through
all of these fonts at myfonts.com,
there are other resources out there, too,
of course, but that's just where
I happen to be looking.
I found all these awesome fonts,
and I had a really hard time even
deciding on one to use for this layout.
Another great example is this font,
which is called Starburst,
designed by Dieter Steffman.
And here's another cool one,
also designed by Ray Larrabee,
that I really like also.
So a lot of these fonts are really
inspiring and give you a lot of
flexibility in terms of if you
want to stick with true text on
your web page instead of using
images for the cool pieces of text.
Okay, so we've talked a lot about visual
whizziness and all this kind of
eye candy and the new hotness and,
you know, the awesome, cool new things.
And the important thing to remember is
that not all of your users experience the
user interface in a way that they benefit
at all from this visual whizziness.
When you're dealing with accessibility,
it's other kinds of whizziness that
your users really benefit from.
And a user interface
does not discriminate.
It's just as user.
So it's really important to keep all
of your users in mind if you want a
truly sophisticated user interface.
So to tell you some more about
web accessibility and the new
whizziness that we've added there,
I would like to invite
my friend and colleague,
Alice Liu, on stage.
I'm a Safari and WebKit engineer.
I'm going to talk to you a little
bit about web accessibility.
I know a lot of you are professional web
developers and some of you are novices,
but even if you do this for a living,
you might not be very
familiar with this concept.
So let me give you -- let's just
start with a slight introduction.
Accessibility features on OS X mainly
serve users who have some kind of
impairment that makes it difficult for
them to use a computer the way that other
people like me and you use a computer.
This, there are several kinds of
impairments that can help,
where accessibility can come in to help.
For example,
if a user has a hearing impairment,
they might need visual alerts instead
of the audible alerts like beeps that
you and I are so used to hearing.
Also,
any video that is captured on a Mac has
the ability to be closed captioned.
If a user has a physical impairment,
like a manual dexterity impairment,
they might not be able to use
a mouse or other input device,
and so full keyboard access can
really help someone out like this.
Visual, many of you might have
visual impairments.
I know I do.
And they can range from minor to severe.
And so if you're one of those people that
has trouble making out a lot of detail,
the Zoom feature on
OS X can help you out.
Some may have very severe
visual impairments,
and so they might need to use a screen
reader to interface with the system.
A lot of these, all of these features
are built into OS X,
all these features and more,
including the screen reader.
We're actually kind of unique in that,
well, maybe not too unique,
but it's not always a given that a
screen reader is provided on a platform.
So Apple feels really great
about providing this as
built-in because sometimes these
programs can cost up to $1,000.
This is great for you because you
can try it out on your website,
on your applications,
without making any kind
of investment at all.
So, our built-in screen reader
called VoiceOver is actually
more than just a screen reader.
It's more like a spoken interface because
not only is the screen read to you,
but also other stuff like the status
of activities and the boundaries
of objects are also communicated.
So, it's really a spoken
interface to the whole system.
So, if you were to write any app
or any plain old web page,
if you were to use VoiceOver on
that app or web page,
VoiceOver would already know a
bunch of stuff to say about it
and communicate that to the user
all without you doing anything.
So, how does it know how to do this?
Well, for apps,
the application framework provides
the basic information for apps and
the stuff that they're made of,
like windows and views and buttons,
stuff like that.
Similarly, WebKit provides this basic
information for web content and
its building blocks elements.
So, we read the tags and we're able
to know what to say about it based
on the tag and the info in it.
So you might not have
tried VoiceOver before,
or maybe you accidentally turned
it on and then turned it back off
because you were scared of the voice.
But we're going to play a little game.
We're going to try-- I'm going
to present to you clips of
VoiceOver working on websites and
see if you can guess the website.
So shout out your answers
when these things come up.
The first one.
Interact with HTML content.
Link, get home delivery.
Link, login.
Link, register now.
Home page.
Link, my times.
Link, today's paper.
New York Times, great.
That was-- I guess that one was easy.
Okay, well, they'll get a little harder.
Oh, I'm sorry,
I was supposed to switch the slide.
But yes, New York Times.
Okay, one more.
Visit a link, Gmail.
Link, Calendar.
Documents.
Link, Photos.
Google?
Well, not exactly.
It's actually Google Docs.
You're kind of just seeing what's on top,
but the main content is not
apparent to you immediately.
And one more.
HTML content has keyboard focus.
Main HTML content.
Well, actually, it's a site that was
made with a plug-in only.
So if you chose to create
your site with only a plug-in,
and you chose not to add any
accessibility information on top of it,
then you're going to get this
kind of experience because you're
not going to get any of the
behavior for free from WebKit.
There is a way to build accessibility
information into plug-in sites,
but it's actually not a very
popular practice on the web.
So out in the wild,
you usually will be left
with no usable information.
Okay, so now that you got a little
taste of what it's like to
use VoiceOver on a website,
you might have noticed
that it's kind of hard to,
except for the New York Times,
it's kind of hard to know, like,
what exactly am I looking at?
I'm only told what's at the top.
And that's really hard for some users.
So, you might not really even care.
If you're a professional web developer,
you might be,
I'm sorry.
If you're a professional web developer,
you might be more concerned
about making things look great
instead of about accessibility.
But let me share with you some reasons
why you should care about accessibility.
The first reason is
probably the most obvious,
that some users are impaired,
and this is the only way that you
can give them a web experience,
a better web experience.
And it might not really appeal to you.
That one might not really appeal to you.
So think about this one.
There's an aging user base
of web users out there,
and those users might rely on your
site for any particular reason.
But as they grow older,
their manual dexterity
might be decreasing,
so they might not be able to use a mouse.
Or their visual acuity may be decreasing,
so they might have to soon use
a screen reader or Zoom feature.
Those users depend on your site,
and you want to adapt
with them as they adapt.
Another reason is non-human users.
So search engines and bots and automation
systems all tap into accessibility
information of your web content in
order to gain information about it.
And if you care about accessibility,
you might end up with
better search results,
better hits.
So all of these things have to do
with increasing your market share.
And market share and
viewership as web developers,
that's pretty important to you, right?
Well, even if you don't,
your competition might or
they might already be doing
it without you even knowing,
so you might want to look into that.
Another last reason why you should care
about accessibility is because you might
find that it's possible to get into
some legal trouble if you're big enough.
So, Target, the discount retailer,
once offered a deal that was
only available on their website,
but it wasn't available in
their brick and mortar stores.
So, this would have been fine if
their website were accessible,
however, it wasn't.
And so, you get,
a situation was created in
which discrimination happens.
So, they found themselves
with some legal trouble.
So -- so -- so web content
has really changed,
from yesterday.
We used to find that web content
was pretty static and that most --
most pages read in a document form.
And it was like an essay mostly,
and there wasn't a lot
of dynamic content.
Well, the way a screen reader works,
works great with the way
that the Web used to be.
So it walks through the DOM.
So it starts at the top and you
walk element by element and --
in order to navigate through.
So the way that the Web used to be and
the way that a screen reader works,
that's -- that's really -- they're
really compatible in that way.
However, you are at this talk about
rich user interfaces,
and you actually came here to
-- to see a lot of whizzy stuff,
and you weren't expecting
to talk about accessibility.
But this is -- this is a very
pertinent issue about how rich --
rich Internet applications interface
with -- interface with accessibility.
So web content has really evolved,
and now we find ourselves -- you -- you
find yourself making sites that move
and interact in a multitude of ways.
And there are a certain set of users out
there that aren't able to enjoy this.
Well, so -- so I know that -- I know
that you spend a lot of time
making your site look great,
because that's really
what you care about.
And -- and I think that's -- I think
I'm sorry.
So we know that you spend a lot of
time making your site look great.
And you might say meh to the idea
of caring about accessibility
instead of making your website
very rich and cutting edge.
But you don't have to leave
one and pursue the other.
They're actually-- they're
goals that can coexist.
And the way that we can do this is with
new web technologies that browsers,
including browser engines,
including WebKit, are implementing.
And I'm going to tell you about
those technologies in a minute.
But the basic idea that I want you to
take home today is that cutting edge
doesn't have to mean inaccessible,
because we want you to access
enable what you already have and
build on top of your existing work.
You can still have those whizzy
features and have great and
accessible interface to them.
And you won't have to
overhaul your structure.
One thing I want to remind you about
is you may be familiar with the
practice of creating a separate site
for accessibility and something
that's separate from your main site.
Well, separate is not equal.
And people who are concerned with
web accessibility will recommend
that you not practice in this way.
Well, let's get into how we're going to
improve accessibility of rich sites.
So getting around in web content
is increasingly harder if you have
a bunch of content on your site.
And so we can show you ways
to improve keyboard navigation
with new technologies.
HTML5 adds the focus
event on every element.
And this will allow you to better--
to better configure how keyboard
navigation moves around on your page.
And before, you were only able to focus
form elements and links.
But now you can focus anything,
including divs and images,
which you probably tried
to work around before.
But now they can be directly focusable.
The way that you can configure
focusability is through
the tab index attribute,
which is now also
available on every element.
When you specify tab index at all,
it makes it focusable by script
and also by mouse clicks.
If you specify a negative
input to tab index,
then you remove it from the tab order.
So there's lots of ways in which
you can use this to your advantage.
And this practice
benefits a lot of users.
I know some of you are power users.
And power users especially love
to have great keyboard-- keyboard
navigation and full keyboard access.
So this is going to be something
that benefits many users
and not just impaired users.
The main thing I want to talk
to you about today is ARIA.
And ARIA is an emerging standard.
An emerging standard.
And we've started on our
implementation of ARIA as well
as other browsers have too.
And ARIA stands for Accessible
Rich Internet Applications.
And the main thing about ARIA is
that it's going to let your
-- it's going to let your --
It's going to give you the ability
to make your internet applications
behave just like native applications.
And the way that it does that
is it's letting you tap into the
built-in accessibility framework.
And it's giving you the freedom
to specify your elements,
specify the elements in your web page
just like how an application has it.
And on top of that,
it's going to let you communicate
the relationships that
exist between your elements.
So the elements in your page interact in
special ways and they have relationships
and you're going to be able to
communicate that with use of ARIA.
ARIA is really simple to use because
there's some really simple basics.
One of the basic fundamentals
of ARIA is the concept of roles,
and roles allow you to describe
the purpose of your elements.
There are over 50 roles that you
can use to specify the purpose
of the things in your web pages.
They fall into kind of
two different categories.
Some roles describe widgets,
which in examples are alert
dialog and progress bar.
And the reason why this is great
is because your users already
have a built-in understanding
of how certain widgets work.
And if you describe your custom
widgets as these widgets,
then they can benefit from already
having an understanding of how they work.
The other kind describes structure.
And what I mean by this is how
the element -- you're describing
how the element fits into the
overall hierarchy of the page.
One example of this is the main role.
And the main role is going
to allow you to say that,
oh, this thing in my web
page is the main content,
and this other stuff is secondary.
So it gives the user a better
sense of what -- of the layout
and the purpose of the page.
of various parts of your webpage.
Another good rule to use is Live Region.
Using the Live Region role on an
element that updates its content
from time to time is going to
communicate to the user that,
yeah, this element is going to
change from time to time,
and this is something that you already
communicate to other users visually,
but this is going to allow you to
communicate this non-visually as well.
So using roles is really easy.
Up on the board, I have -- up here,
I have exactly what it takes
to add a role to an element.
So it's very common to have an image
and then have some text that describes
the image and then use that as a button.
Well, if you're using it as a button,
just say it's a button.
And now, by using role equals button,
you communicate to the user
that this is a button and not
just an image with some text.
Another basic concept of ARIA is the
concept of states and properties.
And states you're already
pretty familiar with.
They describe the status of elements,
like a disabled text field
or a selected radio button.
ARIA is going to let you -- ARIA is
expanding the field and letting
you use these states on lots of
elements and not just form controls.
Properties let you describe
the relationships that
exist between your elements.
One example is the labeled by property.
You might be familiar with
the label HTML tag where you
label a certain form element.
But ARIA is going to let you use any
element as a label for any other element.
It's just expanding your horizons.
Another example of this is required.
So you might be in the practice of using
a little red asterisk near your form,
near your text field to say
that you have to fill this in.
Well, you communicated that visually,
but not non-visually,
and required is going to allow
you to do that non-visually.
Active Descendant is a
pretty interesting property,
and I'm going to go into
it a little bit more.
The Active Descendant property
is another thing you can use
to improve keyboard navigation,
in addition to tab index.
And it basically allows you
to focus an element on behalf
of the assistive technology.
The way it works, I'll give an example.
Let's say you have a list box,
a custom list box,
and it's not one that you
made with the select element.
And you have some inner children.
So you can specify an inner child
as the list box Active Descendant.
If you change the active
descendant property,
then it will trigger a change in the
focus of the assistive technology.
So basically,
you can use a key event listener
and change the active descendant.
And so you can use up and down to
focus the child elements one by one.
And this all happens while the outer
element maintains keyboard focus.
And the reason why this is great is
because you can fully make your--
you can make your list box fully
keyboard accessible without cluttering
the tab navigation by just having
the parent be keyboard focusable.
So this might be a little confusing.
So let me give you some
examples of how to do this.
And I'd like to invite
Beth up here to show us some.
Thanks, Alice.
That was great.
So now we're all kind
of on the same page.
We have a basic understanding of web
accessibility and we have a basic
understanding about how screen readers in
general and voiceover specifically work.
So now we're going to show you how
we can really use these new features,
ARIA and Tab Index, et cetera,
to really improve existing
web content very simply.
So rich internet applications,
that's right in the title of ARIA,
Accessible Rich Internet Applications.
So we decided to look
at one of those first.
at .Mac specifically.
So Alice is going to pull up .Mac here.
One of the things that makes .Mac a
rich internet application is that it
looks so much like a native application.
A lot of really successful rich
internet applications do that.
But how is this
experience with VoiceOver?
Well, we're going to show you now.
Specifically, we're going to look at this
toolbar at the top that's,
again, almost identical to the toolbar
that you have in Mail.app,
where we have the delete and reply,
reply all, new buttons, etc.
So, Alice,
why don't you fire up VoiceOver and
navigate to these buttons on the toolbar.
Delete image.
Delete.
Reply image.
Reply.
Reply all image.
Reply all.
Voice over off.
So that's kind of weird, right?
As a sighted user,
I can see clearly that these
are supposed to be buttons,
but that wasn't really conveyed
by the screen reader at all.
In fact,
it didn't really even give any indication
that these elements are interactable.
This really isn't .Mac's fault at all.
Until now, with ARIA,
which is a part of the
Safari 4 developer preview,
portions of ARIA, that is.
Until now, with that in their hands,
there was really no way to
directly affect how a screen reader
would interpret these elements.
The screen reader is stuck in a
land of implementation details.
So the fact that these buttons
were not created with a button
element or an input type equals
button means that without ARIA,
the screen reader has no way to know
that they're supposed to be buttons.
But now we do have ARIA in the
Safari 4 developer preview.
So what we did was we downloaded
the source code for .Mac and made a
local copy and edited it a little.
And all we did was add
fractions of lines of code.
We just added that ARIA role
attribute to each of these divs
that contains the images and the
text that represent these buttons.
So we just added role equals
button to all of those divs,
and that's it.
And so Alice is going to show
you the new version of .Mac.
Again, looks the same.
We just added some role attributes.
And she's going to fire up
voiceover now and show you.
Sorry.
That's okay.
Keep going.
Reply button.
Reply all button.
Forward button.
Voiceover off.
So that's much better.
Again, that's going back to the
point of accessibility,
which is providing the same
experience to all of your users.
And here we were able to achieve that
with just fractions of lines of code.
It was simple.
It can even be an afterthought
in a case like this.
It's incredibly easy.
So, but, you know,
we've been talking a lot.
Alice was talking a lot about
rich Internet applications.
I mentioned it again.
It's really not just
Internet applications that can
benefit from these new features.
It's really any modern web content.
As Alice explained to you earlier,
it's really the static document style
web content that works really well
automatically with a screen reader.
But any sort of really modern content
is going to struggle a little bit more.
So one example of some modern
web content that is not a web
application is the simple,
photo demo that Vicky and I were
showing you earlier that we
built up throughout this talk.
So Alice is going to load up the
photo demo and she's going to show
you now how this works with voiceover.
[Transcript missing]
VoiceOver on Safari, Window Photo Demo,
HTML Content has Keyboard Focus.
Interact with HTML content
heading level 2,
life in Maui.
Palm trees on the beach image.
So that's what we're seeing, right?
So Alice, why don't you use the voiceover
command to simulate a click
to click on that image?
Chocolate-covered ice
cream in a clamshell image.
Nice.
You want to use it again?
Rocky shoreline and blue sky image.
Awesome.
Red plants and green trees image.
Voice over off.
There you go.
So there, again,
with just a few HTML attributes,
we were able to change the user
experience to match what we created
for sighted users using voice over.
So it's not just rich internet
applications that benefit
from this new specification,
accessible rich internet applications.
It's really any modern web content.
And it's so simple,
it's just adding attributes
to your existing HTML.
Can we go back to slides, please?
Okay, so let's review what we did today.
We started with a very simple
page of photos that did not
look very sophisticated at all.
We played with the user interface
a lot until we came up with one
that I think is totally awesome.
We made it really cool and fun to
interact with by adding CSS transitions
in addition to the transforms that we
added to create this initial appearance.
And then we used web fonts and text
stroke and text shadow to make our
little heading look really awesome,
too.
And finally,
we made it accessible because a
truly sophisticated user interface is
sophisticated for all of your users.
So if you have any questions,
Vicki Murley and Mark Malone
know pretty much everything.
There are all kinds of other
sessions this week going
on about Safari and WebKit.
There are a few that really
pertain to all of this user
interface stuff in particular.
One of them was earlier in the day,
and if you missed it,
I highly recommend catching up with
it when ADC puts out the whole,
like, talks and slide things on iTunes,
and that was 3:44.
But there are more sessions
tomorrow and Thursday.
There are sessions related to Safari and
WebKit that don't directly involve user
interface that will still be really cool,
like a session on Ajax on Thursday,
a session on offline
data and debugging tools.
Also, oh, I had that up there.
And now it's time for Q&A.